[apply] add status header section (#1442)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/0006-apply.md

+structType=atomic` respectively. They map to the same openapi extension:
`"x-kubernetes-map-type": "atomic"`.

> #### Clients

Reviewer: Thanks for organizing the file along the way

##### Apply Status Header

Client side apply in kubectl provides the user with information if the applied config resulted in any changes

> on the apiserver.

Reviewer: Not sure it really matters, but that's not exactly HOW it happens. The client tries to detect changes and will send these changes if they exist.

Author: i made it a little clearer. thanks for this information, didn't know that.

To provided the same information with server-side apply, a dedicated header is set by the apiserver
if the request caused changes to the existing resource.

```txt

> X-Kubernetes-Apply-Status: "modified" || "unmodified"

Reviewer: Would you mind describing all possible values and what they mean exactly? What does it mean for the resource to be modified. I'm also assuming we only send this annotation on apply? Can it be missing? What does missing mean? Old versions don't send it so I'm guessing it must be allowed.

Author: I am split between:
- only send the header, with one value, if apply changed (i had it `X-Kubernetes-Applied: "true"`)
- send "modified" for applies that updated the managedFields, "unmodified" for ones that didn't (ignoring stripped/removed fields). Missing the header would be "unknown" for the client and most likely indicates the server is old.

We could set the header for other operations as well. I don't really have an opinion on this right now. It would need a different name then.

Reviewer 2: I suggest "Changes-Made" and "Changes-Unneeded" as the two string values. (just saying "unmodified" could be confused for an error condition, I think.)

Less important, consider instead of "X-Kubernetes-Apply-Success-Type" as the header name unless you intend to add in other values (e.g., something about a conflict).

Author: Yeah, i wouldn't put conflict in there. it is already clear from the error (and status code i think).

Don't have a strong opinion on the header name aside from that.

Author: On my comment before, i tend to stick with some kind of changed/unchanged so that header absence can not mean two things (unchanged|unknown), but only that the server does not know the header.

@lavalamp what do you think about adding the header for non-apply as well?

Reviewer 2: I think it's OK to name the header such that it'd make sense on other verbs, but let's not actually implement it for anything but APPLY for the moment.

Reviewer 2: I think we should say this is an optional header and clients shouldn't deduce anything in particular from its absence.

```

This header can then be used by e.g. `kubectl` to provide the user with the desired information (rel: [#85750](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/85750), [#66450](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/66450)).

An alternative that was considered is a http status code, indicating the resource was not modified.

> This approach was discarded due to the lack of a matching 2xx status code.

Reviewer 2: Please add a paragraph to the effect that the intended use of this is informational only, and it's buggy to e.g. avoid doing the next step in a multi-step deployment based on the value of this header.

+structType=atomic` respectively. They map to the same openapi extension:
`"x-kubernetes-map-type": "atomic"`.

#### Clients

##### Apply Status Header

Client side apply in kubectl determines if the applied object would result in any changes on the apiserver and provides the user with this information.

> To provided similar information with server-side apply, a dedicated header is set by the apiserver

Reviewer 2: s/provided/provide/

if a **successful apply request** caused changes to the existing resource.

```txt
X-Kubernetes-Apply-Success-Type: "changes-made" || "changes-unneeded"
```

The value may be,

> - `changes-unneeded` in cases where the request did not cause a change to the resource's managedFields.

Reviewer: I would very clearly rephrase this, and consider how we're going to detect changes.

After giving it some thoughts, it seems clearly superior to me to compare the resourceVersion before and after going to etcd. That is the best and most efficient way to know if something actually changed.  (I'm also assuming that a no-op apply won't write to etcd, which I think we have tests for since it's a necessary requirement).

We can take that thought and go further: Apply is not the only verb where the request is made without knowing the current resourceVersion (hence client can't check that it changed):
- Create is an obvious case that is no worth discussing about,
- Update may (hopefully) or may not specify the resource version, I think it might be useful in the latter case to report if the resource has changed.
- All forms of PATCH, including apply, may or may not know the resourceVersion of the resource they are editing. In all these cases, it might be useful to return that information. Also note that this would literally fix **once and for all** issue https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/66450, since right now we decide if the resource is changed when we send a patch, even if the patch does nothing.

I don't know if "needed" is the right word then. `changes-made`?

Author: @lavalamp could you take a look at this comment?
I'm in favor of the points @apelisse made and would change the KEP based on them.
This also means including non-apply and therefor also look for a more generic header name.

I'm not sure if this change would make a replacement for what kubectl currently does. @apelisse mentioned the diff is made before applying. If kubectl would skip an apply if there is no expected change, that would be different.

Reviewer 2: > All forms of PATCH, including apply, may or may not know the resourceVersion of the resource they are editing

The *user* might not know, but that doesn't seem important since *apiserver* definitely knows?

Reviewer: Yeah, the question is, do we want the apiserver to let the user know? User feedback seems to confirm that they do want to know.

> - `changes-unneeded` in cases where the request did not cause a change to the resource's managedFields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `changes-unneeded` in cases where the request did not cause a change to the resource.
```

> This means changes to fields that don't get owned or get reset, will be ignored when setting the header.

Author: will it be a problem to return unneeded when the user changed fields either stripped from managedFields or wiped by the not implemented yet status wiping feature?

Reviewer 2: That should be fine, I think.

Reviewer: See my comment above.

Reviewer 2: I would just omit this line completely. "changes" that don't actually affect the object are not changes. This may be a difference from what the client side tool does, but I'd argue that the client side tool is reporting a different (and less useful) thing.

> This means changes to fields that don't get owned or get reset, will be ignored when setting the header.

Reviewer 2: > in cases where the request did not cause a change to the resource's managedFields

That's not right-- it should be "in cases where the request did not cause a change to the resource." I'm pretty sure people care about whether the object changed at all, not about the ownership.

> This means changes to fields that don't get owned or get reset, will be ignored when setting the header

I don't understand this sentence

> - `changes-made` in cases where the request causes a change to the resource's managedFields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `changes-made` in cases where the request causes a change to the resource.
```

This header is optional.
If the header is missing on the response, the apiserver may be older than this feature.
Clients should never deduce anything from the absence of this header.

This header can then be used by e.g. `kubectl` to provide the user with the desired information (rel: [#85750](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/85750), [#66450](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/66450)).

**The header is intended to be informational only.**
No behavior should be determined based on it's existence or value.

> It is not reliable to use this header as a mechanism for controlling multi-step deployments, which would be highly discouraged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This header is informational, not a mechanism for controlling multi-step deployments. Since clients may crash and retry from arbitrary points in a multi-step deployment, lack of action at one stage doesn't imply other stages don't need action.
```

> This header is informational, not a mechanism for controlling multi-step deployments. Since clients may crash and retry from arbitrary points in a multi-step deployment, lack of action at one stage doesn't imply other stages don't need action.

Reviewer 2: Combine with previous paragraph to read: 

`No automated behavior should be performed based on its existence or value. In particular, this is not a mechanism...`

+structType=atomic` respectively. They map to the same openapi extension:
`"x-kubernetes-map-type": "atomic"`.

#### Clients

##### Apply Status Header

Client side apply in kubectl determines if the applied object would result in any changes on the apiserver and provides the user with this information.

To provide similar information with server-side apply, a dedicated header is set by the apiserver
if a **successful request** caused changes to the existing resource.

```txt

> X-Kubernetes-Operation-Success-Type: "changes-made" || "changes-unneeded"

Reviewer 2: Since the below text aims at eventually making this more general, we need to ensure that this is either a) complete or b) future-proof (i.e., can add values without breaking clients).

I can think of ways of extending this, so it meets b), but I'm not sure it's obvious how that would work.

Can you state, in the text, how we'd e.g. go about adding a classification? Since we don't have many headers like this in our system, I don't think we have a common pattern. I guess the most obvious way is "leave this header untouched, add a second header that includes the possibility of the new classification." Another way is 

Alternatively, I can live with the current state if both @deads2k and @liggitt agree.

I'd consider, instead of `X-Kubernetes-Operation-Success-Type`, maybe `X-Kubernetes-Operation-Effect`?
